# Section 11: Creating a CLIPS Run‑time Program

## 11.1 Compiling the Constructs

This section describes the procedure for creating a CLIPS run‑time module. A run‑time program compiles all of the constructs (defrule, deffacts, deftemplate, etc.) into a single executable and reduces the size of the executable image. A run-time program will not run any faster than a program loaded using the **load** or **bload** commands. The **constructs-to-c** command used to generate a run-time program creates files containing the C data structures that would dynamically be allocated if the **load**; or **bload** command was used. With the exception of some initialization routines, the **constructs-to-c** command does not generate any executable code. The primary benefits of creating a run-time program are: applications can be delivered as a single executable file; loading constructs as part of an executable is faster than loading them from an text or binary file; the CLIPS portion of the run-time program is smaller because the code needed to parse constructs can be discarded; and less memory is required to represent your program's constructs since memory for them is statically rather than dynamically allocated.

Creating a run‑time module can be achieved with the following steps:

1\) Start CLIPS and load in all of the constructs that will constitute a run‑time module. Call the **constructs‑to‑c** command using the following syntax:

(constructs‑to‑c \<file‑name\> \<id\> \[\<target-path\> \[\<max-elements\>\]\])

where \<file‑name\> is a string or a symbol, \<id\> is an integer, \<target-path\> is a string or symbol, and the \<max-elements\> is an integer. For example, if the construct file loaded was named \"expert.clp\", the conversion command might be

(constructs‑to‑c exp 1)

This command would store the converted constructs in several output files (\"exp1_1.c\", \"exp1_2.c\", \... , \"exp7_1.c\") and use a module id of 1 for this collection of constructs. The use of the module id will be discussed in greater detail later. Once the con­version is complete, exit CLIPS. For large systems, this output may be *very* large (\> 200K). If \<target‑path\> is specified, it is prepended to the name of the file when it is created, allowing target directory to be specified for the generated files. For example, specifying the target path Temp\\ on a Unix system would place the generated files in the directory Temp (assuming that it already exists).

It is possible to limit the size of the generated files by using the \<max‑elements\> argument. This argument indicates the maximum number of structures which may be placed in a single array stored in a file. Where possible, if this number is exceeded new files will be created to store additional information. This feature is useful for compilers that may place a limitation on the size of a file that may be compiled.

Note that the .c extension is added by CLIPS. When giving the file name prefix, users should consider the maximum number of characters their system allows in a file name.

Constraint information associated with constructs is not saved to the C files generated by the **constructs-to-c** command unless dynamic constraint checking is enabled (using the **set-dynamic-constraint-checking** command).

2\) Set the RUN_TIME setup flag in the **setup.h** header file to 1 and compile all of the c files just generated.

3\) Modify the **main.c** module for embedded operation. Unless the user has other specific uses, the argc and argv arguments to the main function should be elimi­nated. Also do *not* call the **CommandLoop** or **RerouteStdin** functions which are normally called from the **main** function of a command line version of CLIPS. Do *not* define any functions in **UserFunctions**[]{.indexref entry="UserFunctions"} functions. These functions are not called during initialization. All of the function definitions have already been compiled in the \'C\' constructs code. In order for your run-time program to be loaded, a function must be called to initialize the constructs module. This function is defined in the \'C\' constructs code, and its name is dependent upon the id used when translating the constructs to \'C\' code. The name of the function is **InitCImage\_\<id\>** where \<id\> is the integer used as the construct module \<id\>. In the example above, the function name would be **InitCImage_1**. The return value of this function is a pointer to an environment (see section 9) which was created and initialized to contain your run-time program. This initialization steps probably would be followed by any user initialization, then by a reset and run. Finally, when you are finished with a run-time module, you can call **DestroyEnvironment** to remove it. An example **main.c** file would be

#include \<stdio.h\>\
#include \"clips.h\"

extern Environment \*InitCImage_1(void);

main()\
{

Environment \*env;

env = InitCImage_1();

•\
• /\* Any user Initialization \*/\
•\
Reset(env);

Run(env,-1);

•\
• /\* Any other code \*/\
•

DestroyEnvironment(env);\
}

4\) Recompile all of the CLIPS source code (the RUN_TIME flag should still be 1). This causes several modifications in the CLIPS code. The run‑time CLIPS module does not have the capability to load new constructs. Do NOT change any other compiler flags.

5\) Link all regular CLIPS modules together with any user‑defined function modules and the \'C\' construct modules. Any user-defined functions must have global scope.

6\) The run‑time module which includes user constructs is now ready to run.

Note that individual constructs may not be added or removed in a run‑time environment. Because of this, the **load** function is not available for use in run-time programs. The clear command will also not remove any constructs (although it will clear facts and instances). Use calls to the InitCImage­\_\... functions to clear the environment and replace it with a new set of constructs. In addition, the **build** function does not work in a run‑time environment.

Since new constructs can't be added, a run-time program can't dynamically load a deffacts or definstances construct. To dynamically load facts and/or instances in a run-time program, the CLIPS **load-facts** and **load-instances** functions or the C **LoadFacts** and **LoadInstances** functions should be used in place of deffacts and definstances constructs.

 Important Note

Each call to separate **InitCImage** functions creates a unique environment into which the run-time program is loaded. Only the first call to a given **InitCImage** function will create an environment containing the specified run-time program. Subsequent calls have no effect and a value of NULL is returned by the function. Once the **DestroyEnvironment** function has been called to remove an environment created by an **InitCImage** call, there is no way to reload the run‑time program.

#
