# Section 1: Introduction

This manual is the *Advanced Programming Guide* for CLIPS. It describes the Application Programmer Interface (API) that allows users to integrate CLIPS programs with code written in C. It is written with the assump­tion that the user has a basic understanding of both CLIPS and C. It is advised that users complete the *Basic Programming Guide* before reading this manual.

Section 2 of this document describes how to install and tailor CLIPS to meet specific needs. Section 3 describes the core API needed to embed CLIPS within a simple C program. Section 4 describes the API allowing the creation of constructs and the execution of commands and functions. Section 5 describes the API that allows a C program to keep persistent references to data structures subject to garbage collection. Section 6 describes the API for creating CLIPS primitive data values. Section 7 describes the API for creating Facts and Instances. Section 8 describes the API for adding user‑defined functions. Section 9 describes the API for the I/O router system used by CLIPS for processing input and output requests. Section 10 describes the environment API which allows multiple expert systems to be loaded and run concurrently. Section 11 describes how to create run‑time CLIPS programs which allow constructs to be save as C data structures which can be compiled and linked with CLIPS. Section 12 describes the additional APIs that are available for interacting with and retrieving information from CLIPS.

## 1.1 C++ Compatibility

The CLIPS source code can be compiled using either an ANSI C or C++ compiler. To make CLIPS API calls from a C++ program, it is usually easier to do the integration by compiling the CLIPS source files as C++ files. This removes the need to make an *extern \"C\"* declaration in your C++ program for the CLIPS APIs. Some compilers allow you to specify the whether a file should be compiled as C or C++ code based on the file extension. Other compilers allow you to explicitly specify which compiler to use regardless of the extension (e.g. in gcc the option "-x c++" will compile .c files as C++ files). For compilers that exclusively use the file extension to determine whether the file should be compiled as a C or C++ code, it\'s necessary to change the .c extension of the CLIPS source files to a .cpp extension.

## 1.2 Threads and Concurrency

The CLIPS architecture is designed to support multiple expert systems running concurrently using a single CLIPS application engine. The environment API, described in section 10, is used to implement this functionality. In order to use multiple environments, CLIPS must be embedded within your program either by linking the CLIPS source code with your program or using a shared library such as a Dynamic Link Library (DLL). The standard command line version of CLIPS as well as the Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) provide access to a single environment. It is not possible to load and run multiple expert systems using these versions of CLIPS.

If multiple environments are created, a single thread of execution can be used to run each expert system. In this situation, one environment must finish executing before control can be passed to another environment. The user explicitly specifies which environment should process each API call. Once execution of an API call for that environment begins, the user must wait for completion of the API call before passing control to another environment.

Most likely, this type of execution control will be used when you need to make several expert systems available to a single end user, but don't want to go through the process of clearing the current expert system from a single environment, loading another expert system into it, and then resetting the environment. Instead, each expert system is loaded into its own environment, so to change expert systems it is only necessary to switch to the new environment and reset it.

A less likely scenario for this type of execution control is to simulate multiple expert systems running concurrently. In this scenario, each environment is allowed to execute a number of rules before control is switched to the next environment.

Instead of simulating multiple expert systems running concurrently, using the multi-threading capabilities native to the operating system on which CLIPS is running allows concurrent execution to occur efficiently and prevents one environment from blocking the execution of another. In this scenario, each environment uses a single thread of execution. Since each environment maintains its own set of data structures, it is safe to run a separate thread on each environment. This use of environments is most likely for a shared library where it is desirable to have a single CLIPS engine running that is shared by multiple applications.

 Warning

Each environment can have at most *one* thread of execution. The CLIPS internal data structures can become corrupted if two CLIPS API calls are executing at the same time for a single environment. For example, you can't have one thread executing rules and another thread asserting facts for the same environment without some synchronization between the two threads.
